---
layout: post
title: Context-free Grammar I - Chomsky Hierarchy
categories: formal language
published: true
---

Context-free grammars find applications in many programming languages. In this series, we discuss theoretical underpinnings of context-free grammars and the associated family of languages.

We begin by introducing the notion of rewriting systems and grammars.

**Definition 1 (Rewriting System): A rewriting system is a 2-tuple $$(\Sigma, P)$$ such that**

**(1) $$\Sigma$$ is an alphabet**

**(2) $$P$$ is a finite set of productions, each of which is of the form $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$ where $$p_i, q_i$$ are words in $$\Sigma^*$$**

With a rewriting system $$R$$, we say a word $$v$$ is *directly derived* from the word $$w$$, written as 

$$w \Rightarrow_R v$$

,if $$w$$ is of the form $$rp_is$$ and $$v=rq_is$$ for some production $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$. Furthremore, we say a word $$v$$ is derived from the word $$w$$, written as 

$$ w \Rightarrow_R^* v$$

, if there exists a finite sequence of $$w_1,...,w_n$$ such that 

$$w \Rightarrow_R w_1 \Rightarrow_R ... \Rightarrow_R w_n \Rightarrow_R v $$

Sometimes we ignore the the underscript $$R$$ if the context is clear.

With the notion of derivation, the language generated by a word $$w$$ in a rewriting system $$R$$ is 

$$L(R, w) = \{ v \ | \ w \Rightarrow_R^* v \}$$

Grammars are special types of rewriting systems such that the alphabet is divided into a variable alphabet and a constant alphabet, and specify a variable symbol as the starting symbol.

**Definition 2 (Grammar): A grammar is a quadruple $$(\Sigma_V, \Sigma_C, X_0, P)$$ such that**

**(1) $$\Sigma_V$$ is an alphabet of variable symbols**

**(2) $$\Sigma_C$$ is an alphabet of constant symbols**

**(3) $$X_0 \in \Sigma_V$$ is the starting symbol, also called the axiom**

**(4) $$P$$ is a finite set of productions, each of which is of the form $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$, where $$p_i, q_i$$ are words in $$(\Sigma_V \cup \Sigma_C)^*$$, and there is at least one variable symbol in $$p_i$$**

Variable and constant symbols are also called nonterminal and terminal symbols. In the remaining discussion, we use upper-case letters such as $$X, Y, Z$$ to denote variable symbols, and lower-case letters such as 
$$a, b, c$$ to denote constant variables. Also for convenience, we use $$\Sigma = \Sigma_V \cup \Sigma_C$$ to denote the whole alphabet.

Note that a production like $$a \rightarrow XYb$$ is not allowed in a grammar, as it contains no variable symbol on the left-hand side.

For a grammar $$G$$, the language generated by $$G$$ 
is $$L(G) = \{ w \in \Sigma_C^* \ | \ X_0 \Rightarrow_G^* w\}$$, i.e. the words formed by constant variables and derivable from the starting symbol $$X_0$$. 

Different types of grammars would generate different family of languages. There are four types of grammars, and they form the Chomsky Hierarchy. N

**Type-0 (CE)**: No restriction on $$P$$

**Type-1 (CS)**: Context-sensitive grammars. Each production is of the form $$u_i X_i v_i \rightarrow u_i w_i v_i$$, where $$u_i, v_i \in \Sigma^*$$, and $$w_i \in \Sigma^+$$. We require that $$w_i$$ cannot be 
the empty word $$\epsilon$$. The only exception is the production $$X_0 \rightarrow \epsilon$$ provided that there is no production where $$X_0$$ appear on the right-hand side.

**Type-2 (CF)**: Context-free grammars. Each production is of the form $$X_i \rightarrow w_i$$. That is, there is only one single variable symbol on the left-hand side for any production. The rewriting of $$X_i$$ does 
not depend on any context.

**Type-3 (Linear)**: Linear grammars. Each production is of the form $$X_i \rightarrow w_i$$, where $$w_i$$ contains at most one variable symbol. 

In can be shown that $$Linear \subset CF \subset CS \subset CE$$$. 

The languages in each family are closed under some common language operations, such as union, concatenation, Kleene star, etc. The details will be discussed in the future. 

There is another type of grammars, called **length-increasing grammar**, which geneartes a word of increasing length in any derivation. Specifically, 

**Length-increasing Gramma:** Each production rule is of form $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$, where $$|p_i| \leq |q_i|$$. Again like CS, we allow the exception that $$X_0 \rightarrow \epsilon$$, provided that there is no 
production where $$X_0$$ appears on the right-hand side.

It is easily seen that 

**Lemma 3: Context-sensitive grammar $$\subseteq$$ Length-increasing gramma**

*Proof*: In a context-sensitive grammar, each production is of the form $$u_i X_i v_i \rightarrow u_i w_i v_i$$, where $$w_i$$ cannot be the empty word. Therefore $$|w_i| \geq 1$$ and $$|u_i X_i v_i| \leq |u_i w_i v_i|$$.
$$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

The converse is also true. Before proving this claim, let's prove a useful lemma. 

**Lemma 4 (Removing constants on left-hand side): For any grammar $$G$$, there exists a grammar $$G'$$, whose productions contain no constant variable on the left-hand sides, such that $$L(G) = L(G')$$.**

*Proof:* For any grammar $$G = (\Sigma_V, \Sigma_C, X_0, P)$$, we construct a grammar $$G'$$ as follows. For each constant symbol $$a \in \Sigma_C$$, create a "shadow" symbol $$a'$$ as a new variable symbol. We call the 
set $$\Sigma'_C$$ the shadow set of $$\Sigma_C$$. Let $$\Sigma'_V = \Sigma_V \cup \Sigma'_C$$, i.e. add all shadow variables into the original variables. So we create the new grammar $$G' = (\Sigma'_V, \Sigma_C, X_0, P')$$
, where the new productions $$P'$$ are created as follows.

First, $$P'$$ contains all the productions in $$P$$ except the ones whose left-hand sides contain constants. Next, for a production $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$ containing constants on left-hand side, we replace each constant 
$$a$$ with its shadow variable $$a'$$, and add productions $$a' \rightarrow a$$. After adding these rules, the resulting $$P'$$ is the set of productions in $$G'$$. 

It is easy to see that if $$w \Rightarrow_G v$$ then $$w \Rightarrow_{G'}^* v$$. So $$L(G) \subseteq L(G)$$. Conversely, if $$w \Rightarrow_{G'}^* v$$, then the derivation may or may not contain any $$a' \rightarrow a$$ 
production. If this is the latter case, then $$w \Rightarrow_G^* v$$. If this the former case, since the shadow variables only appear in producitons like $$a' \rightarrow a$$, we have $$w \Rightarrow_G^* v$$ as well. 
Therefore, $$L(G') \subseteq L(G)$$. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

Now we can proceed to prove 

**Theorem 5: Length-increasing gramma $$\subseteq$$ Context-sensitive grammar**

*Proof*: Note that length-increasing production only requires $$|p_i| \leq |q_i|$$. It makes no assumption about the forms of $$p_i$$ or $$q_i$$. However, productions $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$ in a context-sensitive grammar 
requires $$p_i, q_i$$ to take the forms $$u_i X_i v_i \rightarrow u_i w_i v_i$$. Below we prove that every length-increasing rule $$p_i \rightarrow q_i$$ can be replaced by a finite set of context-sensitive rules. 

So consider a length-increasing but not context-sensitive rule $$p \rightarrow q$$. By Lemma 4, we can assume that there are no constants in $$p_i$$. Thus, $$p, q$$ are of the forms 

$$X_1...X_m \rightarrow Y_1...Y_n$$

, where $$n \geq m \geq 2$$ (Note $$X_1 \rightarrow Y_1Y_2$$ is a context-sensitive rule. Thus $$m \geq 2$$.) We create a finite set of new variables $$Z_1,...,Z_m$$, and add the following context-sensitive rules:

$$\begin{align}
\underline{X_1}X_2...X_m &\rightarrow \underline{Z_1}X_2...X_m \\
Z_1 \underline{X_2}...X_m &\rightarrow Z_1 \underline{Z_2}...X_m \\
&\vdots \\
Z_1...Z_{m-1}\underline{X_m} &\rightarrow Z_1...Z_{m-1}\underline{Z_m Y_{m+1}...Y_n} \\
\underline{Z_1}Z_2...Z_m Y_{m+1}...Y_n &\rightarrow \underline{Y_1}Z_2...Z_m Y_{m+1}...Y_n \\
&\vdots \\
Y_1...Y_{m-1}\underline{Z_m}Y_{m+1}...Y_n &\rightarrow Y_1...Y_{m-1}\underline{Y_m}Y_{m+1}...Y_n
\end{align}$$

. The underlines indicate the rewritings. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

By Lemma 3 and Theorem 5, we have 

**Theorem 6: Context-sensitive Grammars = Length-increasing Grammars**

## Regular Languages are Type-0 Languages

We show regular languages are exactly languages generated by type-0 grammars.

A regular language $$L$$ is equivalent to a DFA $$M=(\Sigma, Q, q_0, T, \delta)$$. Since there is only a finite number of states and the alphabet is also finite, we take $$\Sigma_V = Q$$, $$\Sigma_C = \Sigma$$, 
$$X_0 = q_0$$ and the productions are: $$q_i \rightarrow a q_j$$ whenever $$\delta(q_i, a) = q_j$$. Finally, for every terminal state $$q_t \in T$$ we construct a production $$q_t \rightarrow \epsilon$$. The resulting 
grammar is type-0 grammar. This process proves 

**Lemma 6: Regular Language $$\subseteq$$ Type-3 Language**

On the other hand, proving a type-0 language is regular language would require first construct an equivalent type-0 grammar where each production takes the form of either $$X_1 \rightarrow aY_1$$, or $$X_2 \rightarrow Y_2b$$,
or $$X_3 \rightarrow \epsilon$$. The resulting language $$L$$ is a concatenation of two regular languages $$L_1L_2$$, where $$L_1$$ is generated by a DFA equivalent to all $$X_1 \rightarrow aY_1$$ rules and $$L_2$$ all 
$$X_2 \rightarrow Y_2 b$$ rules. The details are as follows.

**Lemma 7: For any type-3 grammar, there is an equivalent type-3 grammar whose productions are either of the form $$X_1 \rightarrow aY_1$$, or of the form $$X_2 \rightarrow Y_2 b$$, or $$X_3 \rightarrow \epsilon$$.**

*Proof*: The equivalence of two grammars means they generate the same language. 

Consider a type-3 grammar $$G$$. Suppose its production is of the form $$X_i \rightarrow u_i Y_i v_i$$. If there is no production of the form $$X_j \rightarrow \epsilon$$, then $$G$$ generates the empty language $$\emptyset$$.
In this case, just create the type-3 grammar with only one production $$X_1 \rightarrow Y_1$$ and it generates $$\emptyset$$ as well. 

In a general case, we construct the set of productions of the forms $$X'_{i_K} \rightarrow a_{i_k}Y'_{i_k}, X'_{i_j} \rightarrow Y'_{i_j} b_{i_j}$$ to replace the production $$X_i \rightarrow u_i Y_i v_j$$. The process is 
as follows. First, if both $$u_i, v_i$$ are empty, then the rule is $$X_i \rightarrow Y_i$$. For every rule that $$Y_i$$ appears on the left, we replace all $$Y_i$$ appearances in that rule with $$X_i$$ (note a rule like 
$$Y_i \rightarrow u Y_i v$$ will be replaced by $$X_i \rightarrow u X_i v$$). In this way, we eliminate all the rules of the form $$X_i \rightarrow Y_i$$. 

Second, if $$u_i = a_1...a_n$$ is not empty, we create $$n$$ new variables $$Z_{i,1},...,Z_{i, n}$$ and add rules 

$$\begin{align}
X_i &\rightarrow a_1 Z_{i,1} \\
Z_{i, 1} &\rightarrow a_2 Z_{i, 2} \\
&\vdots \\
Z_{i, n-1} &\rightarrow a_n Z_{i, n} \\
Z_{i, n} &\rightarrow Y_i v_i 
\end{align}$$ 

Finally, if $$v_i = b_1...b_m$$ is not empty, we create $$m-1$$ new variables $$W_{i, 2},...,W_{i, m}$$ and add rules 

$$\begin{align}
Z_{i, n} &\rightarrow W_{i, m} b_m \\
W_{i, m} &\rightarrow W_{i, m-1} b_{m-1} \\
&\vdots \\
W_{i, 2} &\rightarrow Y_i b_1 \\
\end{align}$$

It is not difficult to show that we obtain the same language by replacing $$X_i \rightarrow u_i Y_i v_i$$ by these $$n+m+1$$ new rules.  $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

**Theorem 8: Type-3 language $$\subseteq$$ Regular Language**

*Proof*: Let $$L$$ be a type-3 language, and $$G$$ be an associated type-3 gramma. By Lemma 7, we may assume the rule in $$G$$ is either of the form $$X \rightarrow u Y $$, 
or of the form $$X \rightarrow Y v$$, or of the form $$X \rightarrow \epsilon$$. If a word $$w \in L$$, it can be written the concatenation of two sub-words (possibly empty) $$w_1 w_2$$ such that 
$$w_1$$ is generated by applying rules of the form $$X \rightarrow uY$$ while $$w_2$$ is generated by applying the rules of form $$X \rightarrow Yv$$. We call $$w_1, w_2$$ the left word and right word of $$w$$, respectively.
Let $$L_1 = \{ w_1 \ | \ w = w_1 w_2 \ and \ w \in L \}$$. (by proper set theory language, the set $$L_1$$ is valid.) That is, $$L_1$$ is the language consisting of all the left words in $$L$$. 
Similarly, let $$L_2$$ be the language consisting of all the right words. Then $$L = L_1 \cdot L_2$$. If $$L_1, L_2$$ are regular, then $$L$$ is regular. The key idea is to construct a DFA $$M_1$$ that recognizes $$L_1$$,
and another DFA $$M_2$$ that recognizes $$\hat{L_2}$$, which is the mirror language of $$L_2$$. Since the mirror of a regular language is also regular, $$L_2$$ is regular.  Therefore, 
it remains to construct the two DFAs $$M_1$$ and $$M_2$$ for our proof.

Let's first construct a directed graph $$M$$ using the rules in $$G$$. Eeach variable is a vertex in the graph. For a rule of the form $$X \rightarrow uY$$, create a directed edge from vertex $$X$$ to vertex $$Y$$ 
and label the edge with $$u$$. In addition, we *color the edge blue*. For a rule of the form $$X \rightarrow Y v$$, create a directed edge from $$X$$ to $$Y$$ with the label $$v$$. But we color it *red*. Finally, for 
the rule of the form $$X \rightarrow \epsilon$$, we label the state $$X$$ as terminal state. 

Next, we construct a $$\epsilon-NFA$$ from $$M$$, which recognizes the language $$L_1$$ as follows. For any vertex $$X$$, let $$C(X)$$ be the red-closure of $$X$$. That is, starting from $$X$$, we traverse the graph 
through red edges, and add vertices along the way to $$C(X)$$. Since the graph has a finite number of vertices, this traversal will terminate. For a vertex $$Y$$ in $$C(X)$$, if there exists a blud edge starting from $$Y$$ 
or $$Y$$ is a terminal state,  then we add a $$\epsilon-$$ and blue edge from $$X$$ to $$Y$$. So by this process, we create a set of $$\epsilon-$$ and blue edges. Now by taking $$X_0$$ as the initial state, all terminal states 
in $$M$$ as the set of terminal states, and all blue edges as transitions, we construct a $$\epsilon-$$NFA $$M_1$$. It is not difficult to show that $$M_1$$ recognizes $$L_1$$. 

Similary, we can use red edges (adding necessary red edges) to construct another $$\epsilon-$$NFA that recognizes $$\hat{L_2}$$. This completes our proof. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

With Lemma 6 and Theorem 8, we conclue that 

**Theorem 9: Regular Language $$=$$ Type-3 Language**

 





