---
layout: post
title: Regular Language III - Finite Index
categories: formal language
published: true
---

Kleene's Theorem tells us that for any regular language $$L$$, there is always a DFA that recognizes $$L$$. But directly construct the DFA would follow the process of creating an equivalent $$\epsilon-$$NFA, turn it into 
an equivalent NFA, and then turn it into a DFA. The resulting DFA may contain two many states. Recall in the proof of converting a NFA to an equivalent DFA, we are taking the states in DFA as a power set of the states in 
the NFA. 

In this post, we will discuss [Myhill-Nerode Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myhill%E2%80%93Nerode_theorem), which gives sufficient and necessary conditions for characterizing regular languages with small finite 
automata. 

We begin with the notion of equivalent prefix. 

**Definition 9 (Equivalent Prefix): For a language $$L$$, we say two words $$w, v$$ are $$L-$$equivalent, denoted by $$w \equiv_L v$$, if for any word $$u$$, either both of $$wu, vu$$ are in $$L$$ or both of 
$$wu, vu$$ are not in $$L$$. In this case, we also say $$w, v$$ are equivalent prefixes with respect to $$L$$.**

With the notion of equivalent prefix, we can define the notion of separation. 

**Definition 10 (Separation): For a language $$L$$, if two words $$w, v$$ are not $$L-$$equivalent, then they are $$L-$$separated. That is, there exists a word $$u$$ such that one of $$wu, vu$$ is in $$L$$ while the 
other is not.**

It is not difficult to see that $$\equiv_L$$ is an equivalent relation. 

**Lemma 11: $$\equiv_L$$ is an equivalent relation for any language $$L$$. That is, for any words $$w, u, v$$**

(1) $$w \equiv_L w$$

(2) If $$w \equiv_L v$$, then $$v \equiv_L w$$

(3) If $$w \equiv_L v$$ and $$v \equiv_L u$$, then $$w \equiv_L u$$.

*Proof*: (1) and (2) are obvious. For (3), consider any word $$x$$. $$wx, vx$$ are either both in $$L$$ or both not in $$L$$. Similarly, $$vx, ux$$ are either both in $$L$$ or both not in $$L$$. Suppose $$wx, vx$$ are in $$L$$. 
Then $$ux$$ must be in $$L$$. Thus $$wx, ux$$ are both in $$L$$. Now suppose $$wx, vx$$ are both not in $$L$$. Then $$ux$$ must not in $$L$$, which results in $$wx, ux$$ are both not in $$L$$. Therefore, $$w \equiv_L u$$.
 $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$
 
For a language $$L$$, the words in $$\Sigma^*$$ can be divided into $$L-$$equivalent classes. The number of these classes is called **the index of $$L$$**. What Myhill-Nerode Theorem states is that any regular language $$L$$ 
that can be recognized by a $$n-$$state DFA has at most a finite index $$n$$. And the converse is also true. To prove this theorem, let's prove several userful lemmas.

**Lemma 12: Let $$L$$ be a regular language that can be recognized by a DFA. For words $$w, u$$, if $$\delta^*(q_0, w) = \delta^*(q_0, u)$$, then $$L$$ does not separate $$w$$ and $$u$$.**

*Proof:* Consider any word $$x$$. Then $$\delta^*(q_0, wx) = \delta^*(\delta^*(q_0, w), x) = \delta^*(\delta^*(q_0, u), x) = \delta^*(q_0, ux)$$. So the terminal state is the same for $$wx, ux$$ for any $$x$$. So 
either both $$wx, ux$$ are in $$L$$, or both not in $$L$$. Therefore, $$L$$ does not separate $$w, u$$.  $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

**Corollary 13: Let $$L$$ be a regular language that can be recognized by a $$m-$$state DFA. If $$L$$ can separate any two of the $$n$$ words $$w_1,...,w_n$$, then $$m \geq n$$.**

*Proof*: If $$m < n$$, then at least two of the following terminal states are equal:

$$\hat{\delta^*}(w_1),...,\hat{\delta^*}(w_n)$$

, since there are at most $$m < n$$ terminal states. By Lemma 12, it means $$L$$ does not separate at least one pair of them. This leads to a contradiction.  $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

**Corollary 14: If a regular language can be recognized by a $$n-$$state DFA, then its index is at most $$n$$.**

*Proof:* This is easily concluded by Corollary 13.  $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

**Theorem 15: If the index of a language $$L$$ is $$n$$, then $$L$$ can be recognized by a $$n-$$state DFA.**

*Proof:* Let the $$n$$ equivalent classes be $$[x_0], [x_1],...,[x_{n-1}]$$. In particular, let $$x_0 = \epsilon$$. We construct the $$n-$$state DFA as follows. 

Take the set of $$n$$ states as $$Q = \{ [x_0], [x_1],...,[x_{n-1}] \}$$. Take $$q_0 = [x_0]$$. For the terminal states, 
take $$T = \{ [x_i] \ | \ x_i \in L \}$$. Note that if $$x \in L$$, then for any $$y \in [x]$$ we have $$y \in L$$. (This is straightforward, because $$y\epsilon, x\epsilon$$ must both be in $$L$$). 
Finally, take $$\delta([x_i], a) = [x_ia]$$. We claim that the resulting $$M = (\Sigma, Q, q_0, T, \delta)$$ is a $$n-$$state DFA that recognizes $$L$$.

To see this, notice that for any word $$w$$, when it is read by $$M$$, the last state is $$[w]$$. So if a word $$w$$ is accepted by $$M$$, it stops at $$[w]$$, which is a terminal state. By construction, $$w \in L$$. 
Conversely, suppose $$w \in L$$. Its last state is $$[w]$$ when it is read by $$M$$. By construction, $$[w]$$ is a terminal state. Thus $$w$$ is accepted by $$M$$.  $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

With Corollay 14 and Theorem 15, we have 

**Theorem 16 (Myhill-Nerode Theorem): A language is regular if and only if it has a finite index.**