---
layout: post
title: Regular Language II - Finite Automata
categories: formal language
published: true
---

In this post, we will introduce **finite automata**. There are three types of finite automata, namely deterministic finite automata (DFA), nondeterministic finite automata (NFA) and nondeterministic finite automata 
with $$\epsilon-$$transition ($$\epsilon-$$NFA). 
We will demonstrate that regular languages are equivalent to these finite automata.

## Deterministic Finite Automata (DFA)

A deterministic finite automata, abbreviated as DFA, is a quintuple $$(\Sigma, Q, q_0, T, \delta)$$, where 

(1) $$\Sigma$$ is an alphabet;

(2) $$Q$$ is a finite set of states;

(3) $$q_0 \in Q$$ is the initial states;

(4) $$T \subseteq Q$$ is the set of terminal states;

(5) $$\delta: Q \times \Sigma \rightarrow Q$$ is a transition function such that $$\delta(q_i, a) = q_j$$ means we jump from state $$q_i$$ to $$q_j$$ upon reading the symbol a. 

When a DFA reads a word $$w$$, it starts from its initial state $$q_0$$, reads each symbol one by one, and transits to different states according to $$\delta$$. Since any word is of finite length, the DFA will eventually 
stops at some state $$q$$. If $$q \in T$$ is one of the terminal states, we say that **the DFA accepts $$w$$**. Otherwise, we say the DFA rejects $$w$$. The language that contains all the words accepted by a DFA $$M$$ is 
called the **language accepted by $$M$$**, and denoted as $$L(M)$$. 


Sometimes we allow $$\delta(q, a)$$ to be left undefined on some $$q, a$$. If the DFA is reading a word containing undefined symbols, it rejects the word. We could call such a DFA as "a partial DFA". It is easily seen that 
a partial DFA $$M$$ can be turned into an equivalent full DFA $$M'$$ (i.e. the transition function is defined on the whole alphabet for every state) by adding a non-terminal "junk state" 
$$q_{-1}$$, and letting $$\delta(q, a) = q_{-1}$$ for the undefined $$q, a$$ in $$M$$ and $$\delta(q_{-1}, a) = q_{-1}$$ for any $$a \in \Sigma$$. Extending a partial DFA to an equivalent full one is typically used when we 
need to extend the alphabet $$\Sigma$$ to $$\Sigma'$$ and construct an equivalent DFA.

We would see that the languages that are accepted by DFAs are exactly regular languages, i.e.  DFAs $$ \Leftrightarrow$$ Regular Languages. In what follows we show the $$\Rightarrow$$ direction. The other direction requires more
complex notions such as NFA and $$\epsilon-$$NFA.

**Theorem 4: DFA $$\Rightarrow$$Regular Language**

*Proof:* Consider a DFA $$M = (\Sigma, Q, S, T, \delta)$$. The language it accepts is $$L(M)$$. We would like to show $$L(M)$$ is a regular language. By the definition of regular languages, we need to show $$L(M)$$ is 
constructed by finite number of the three types of operations on some regular languages. We proceed as follows.

Let $$q$$ denote a finite sequnce of states $$(q_{i_1},...,q_{i_n})$$. Such a sequence is called a chain. If no state appears more than once in $$q$$, we say $$q$$ is a path. If $$q_{i_1} = q_{i_n}$$ and 
$$q_{i_j} \neq q_{i_1}, \ j=2,...,n-1$$, we say $$q$$ is 
a $$q_{i_1}-$$tour. If no state other than $$q_{i_1}$$ appears more than once in a $$q_{i_1}-$$tour, we say $$q$$ is a circuit. Since there are only a finite number of states in a DFA, the number of paths and circuits are 
finite. 

Next, we define the following four sets:

(1) $$L_1(M)$$: the set of words each of which is accepted by a paths

(2) $$L_2(M)$$: the set of words each of which is accepted by a $$q_0$$-circuit

(3) $$L_3(M)$$: the set of words each of which is accepted by a $$q_0$$-tour 

(4) $$L_4(M)$$: the set of words each of which is accepted by a chain 

Since $$L(M) = L_1(M) \cup L_2(M) \cup L_3(M) \cup L_4(M)$$, we proceed to show $$L_i(M), \ i=1,2,3,4$$ are all regular languages.

For $$L_1(M)$$, since the number of states is finite, the number of paths is also finite. For a path $$q = (q_{i_1},...,q_{i_n})$$(note $$q_{i_1} = q_0$$ in a DFA), denote by $$Z_{q_{i_j}}, q_{i_{j+1}}$$ the set of symbols that 
let the DFA jumps from state $$q_{i_j}$$ to state $$q_{i_{j+1}}$$. So the words accepted by $$q$$ are $$Z_{q_{i_1}, q_{q_{i_2}}}...Z_{q_{i_{n-1}}, q_{i_n}}$$. These words form a regular language $$L_q$$. Since there are only 
finitely many $$L_q$$, $$L_1(M) = \bigcup_q L_q$$ is a regular language.

For $$L_2(M)$$, there are finitely manay $$q_0$$-circuits. For each circuit $$q = (q_0, q_{i_2},...,q_{i_{n-1}}, q_0)$$, let $$q' = (q_0, q_{i_1},..., q_{i_{n-1}})$$. Then by the above argument, $$L_{q'}$$ is a regular 
language, and thus $$L_q$ = L_{q'} Z_{q_{i_{n-1}}, q_0}$$ is also a regular language. Hence, $$L_2(M)$$ is a regular language.

For $$L_3(M)$$ and $$L_4(M)$$, the key step is to prove the following lemma.

**Lemma 4.1: Every $$q_i$$-tour is a regular language.**

*Proof of Lemma 4.1:* Let $$n$$ be the number of unique states in a $$q_i$$-tour. The language accepted by $$q_i$$-tours is denoted by $$L_{q_i}$$, and the language accepted by $$q_i$$-tours, where the number of unique 
states is $$n$$, is denoted by $$L_{q_i, n}$$. So $$L_{q_i} = \bigcup_{n=1}^{|Q|} L_{q_i, n}$$. We prove $$L_{q_i, n}$$ is a regular language by induction on $$n$$. 

When $$n=1$$,  the $$q_i$$-tour is $$q_iq_i$$, and clearly $$L_{q_1, 1}$$ is a regular language. 

Assume $$L_{q_i, k}$$ are regular languages for $$k=1,2,...,n-1$$. Consider $$L_{q_i, n}$$. Note that each $$q_i$$-tour is of the following form:

$$q_i, q_{j_{k_0}},...,q_{j_{k_1}}, K_1, q_{j_{k_1 + 1}},...,q_{j_{k_2}}K_2,...., K_m, q_{j_{k_m + 1}},...,q_i$$

, where each $$K_1,...,K_m$$ is a **concatenation** of some $$q_h$$-tours (possibly empty) and 

$$C_{q_i} = q_i, q_{j_{k_0}},...,q_{j_{k_1}}, q_{j_{k_1 + 1}},...,q_{j_{k_2}}  q_{j_{k_m + 1}},...,q_i$$

is a $$q_i$$-circuit. So a $$q_i$$-tour is formed by inserting some $$K_m$$ in some places inside a $$q_i$$-circuit. In the $$q_h-$$tours inside $$K_m$$, the number of unique states is less than $$n$$. By 
induction assumption, the language $$L_{q_h, <n}$$ is a regular language. Therefore, the language accpeted by $$K_m$$ is $$(L_{q_1, <n} \cup  ... \cup L_{q_{|Q_h|, <n}} )^*$$, which is also a regular language.  
Since there are only finitely many $$C_{q_i}$$ circuits, the language $$L_{q_i, n}$$ is union of finite number of regular languages. Thus $$L_{q_i, n}$$ is also regular. 

*End of Proof for Lemma 4.1*

By Lemma 4.1, $$L_3(M)$$ is a regular language. Finally for $$L_4(M)$$, if it is neither a path nor a circuit, then it must take the form 

$$q_i, q_{j_{k_0}},...,q_{j_{k_1}}, K_1, q_{j_{k_1 + 1}},...,q_{j_{k_2}}K_2,...., K_m, q_{j_{k_m + 1}},...,q_j$$

, which is similar to the $$C_{q_i}$$ circuit in Lemma 4.1 except that the final state $$q_j \neq q_i$$. By a similar argument (each chain is formed by inserting some $$q_i$$-tours in a path), 
one can show $$L_4(M)$$ is regular. And this completes our proof. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

## Nondeterministic Finite Automata (NFA)

We have shown that every language accepted by a DFA is regular. The reverse is also ture: for any regular language, there exists a DFA that accepts the language. But the construction of such a DFA is not always easy.

In fact, in both theory and practice, we always try to construct a NFA for a regular language. It can shown that every NFA can be turned into an equivalent DFA. 

A nondeterministic finite automata, abbreviated as NFA, is a quintuple $$(\Sigma, Q, S, T, \delta)$$ such that 

(1) $$\Sigma$$ is an alphabet;

(2) $$Q$$ is a finite set of states;

(3) $$S \subseteq Q$$ is a set of initial states (possibly empty)

(4) $$T \subseteq Q$$ is a set of terminal states

(5) $$\delta: Q \times \Sigma \rightarrow 2^{Q}$$ is a transition function. $$\delta(q, a) = S_q \subseteq Q$$ means that upon receiving symbol $$a$$ at state $$q$$, the next possible states are $$S_q$$. 

In a NFA, the next step is no longer a single state but rather a set of possible states. Before defining how a language is accepted by a NFA, we need to extend the transition function to take a set of states as input.

Let $$\hat{\delta}: 2^{Q} \times \Sigma \rightarrow 2^{Q}$$ be an extended transition function on a NFA such that 

$$\begin{align}
\hat{\delta}(\emptyset, a) &= \emptyset, \ \forall a \in \Sigma \\
\hat{\delta}(U, a) &= \bigcup_{q \in U} \delta(q, a)
\end{align}$$

Furthermore, we extend $$\hat{\delta}$$ to $$\hat{\delta^*}$$ to define on a word. The function $$\hat{\delta^*}: 2^Q \times \Sigma^* \rightarrow  2^Q$$

$$\begin{align}
\hat{\delta^*}(U, \epsilon) &= U \\
\hat{\delta^*}(U, va) &= \hat{\delta}(\hat{\delta^*}(U, v), a)
\end{align}$$

With the above definition, we say a word $$w$$ is accepted by a NFA, if $$\hat{\delta^*(S, w)}$$ contains at least one terminate state. 

In fact, NFA is provides no stronger recognitions power than DFA.

**Theorem 5: NFA $$\Rightarrow$$ DFA**

*Proof:* Let $$M = (\Sigma, Q, S, T, \delta)$$ be a NFA. Take $$Q' = 2^Q$$, $$q'_0 = S$$  and 
$$T' = \{ R \subseteq Q \ | \ R \ contains \ at \ least \ one \ terminal \ state \}$$. Finally, the transition function $$\delta'(q', a)$$ where $$q' \in Q'$$ is defined as: 
$$\delta'(q', a) = \hat{\delta}(q', a)$$. It is not difficult to see that the DFA $$M' = (\Sigma, Q', q'_0, T', \delta')$$ accepts the same language as the NFA $$M$$.  $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

The equivalent DFA requires $$O(2^n)$$ states. In practice, one never explicitly constructs such an equivalent DFA in advance. Instead, as in [Thompson's methond](https://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp/regexp1.html), one 
can construct the necessary part of the DFA for each word on the fly. This would allow much faster searching than the standard backtracking method. 

## Nondeterministic Finite Automata with $$\epsilon-$$transition ($$\epsilon-$$NFA)

Later when we discuss constructing a NFA from other NFAs, it is convenient to allow a transition to take $$\epsilon$$ as input. Such a transition is called a $$\epsilon-$$transition, and the resulting NFA is called 
a $$\epsilon-$$NFA.

To be specific, a $$\epsilon-$$NFA is a NFA where the transition $$\delta$$ is extended to include the definitions $$\delta(q, \epsilon) = E \subseteq Q$$ for every state $$q$$. As a result, the extended $$\hat{\delta}$$ 
is defined as: 

$$\begin{align}
\hat{\delta}(\emptyset, \epsilon) &= \emptyset  \\
\hat{\delta}(U, \epsilon) &= \bigcup_{q \in U} \delta(q, \epsilon) 
\end{align}$$

To define how a word $$w$$ is accepted by a $$\epsilon-$$NFA, we further extend $$\hat{\delta}$$ to $$\hat{\delta^*}$$. First we define $$\hat{\delta^*}(U) = V$$ if $$U \subseteq V$$, $$\hat{\delta}(V, \epsilon) \subseteq V$$ and 
for $$v \in V $$ and $$v \notin U$$, $$v$$ can be obtained by repeatedly applying $$\epsilon$$ transitions to the states in $$U$$.

In fact, $$\hat{\delta^*}(U, \epsilon)$$ is the $$\epsilon-$$closure of the set $$U$$. A $$\epsilon-$$closure of a state $$q$$ is the set of all the states that can be reached by traversing the $$\epsilon-$$edeges 
from $$q$$. The $$\epsilon-$$closure of a set of states is the union of closures of each member state.  

Once $$\hat{\delta^*}(U, \epsilon)$$ is defined, we can define $$\hat{\delta^*}(U, va)$$ for the word $$va$$ recursively as:

$$\hat{\delta^*}(U, va) = \hat{\delta^*}\big( (\hat{\delta}(  \hat{\delta^*}(U, u), a) ) , \epsilon \big)$$

, which means that we apply $$\hat{\delta^*}$$ on the word $$v$$ and then apply $$\hat{\delta}$$ on the symbol$$a$$. Finally, we apply $$\hat{\delta^*}$$ on the $$\epsilon$$ transition. 

The $$\epsilon-$$transitions are instant transition. The automaton need not read a special $$\epsilon$$ symbol. In a $$\epsilon-$$NFA, after reading a symbol and obtaining its direct next states $$V$$, the automaton 
proceeds to find the $$\epsilon$$-closure of $$V$$ and include them in the set of next states.

We say a word $$w$$ is accepted by the $$\epsilon-$$NFA if $$\hat{\delta^*(S, w)}$$ contains at least one terminal state.
Again, $$\epsilon-$$NFAs do not provide more recongnition power than NFAs.

**Theorem 6: $$\epsilon-$$NFA $$\Rightarrow$$ NFA**

*Proof*: Consider a $$\epsilon-$$NFA $$M = (\Sigma, Q, S, T, \delta)$$. Take $$S' =  \hat{\delta^*(S, \epsilon)}$$, i.e. $$S'$$ is the $$\epsilon-$$closure of $$S$$. 
Take $$\delta'(q_i, a) = \hat{\delta^*}(\{q_i\}, a)$$. Let the NFA be $$M' = (\Sigma, Q, S', T, \delta')$$. Clearly $$M$$ and $$M'$$ accpet the same words. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

Note that DFAs, NFAs and $$\epsilon-$$NFAs can accept the empty word $$\epsilon$$. In a DFA, if the initial state $$q_0$$ is also a terminal state, then the DFA can accept $$\epsilon$$. In a NFA, if at least one of the 
initial states is a terminal states, the NFA can accept $$\epsilon$$. Finally, in a $$\epsilon-$$NFA, if the closure of its initial states contains at least one terminal state, it can accept $$\epsilon$$.

Furthermore, if a finite automaton has not terminal states, it recognizes the language $$\emptyset$$. 

## Regular Language $$\Leftrightarrow$$ Finite Automata

For any regular language $$L$$, there exists a $$\epsilon$$-NFA that recognizes $$L$$. Proving this claim would require essentially constructing a $$\epsilon$$-NFA 
from existing ones. These processes are made precise by the following lemma.

**Lemma 7: $$L_1, L_2, L$$ are languages recognized by $$\epsilon$$-NFAs $$M_1, M_2, M$$, respectively. Then,**

**(1) There exists a $$\epsilon$$-NFA that recognizes $$L_1 \cup L_2$$**

**(2) There exists a $$\epsilon$$-NFA that recognizes $$L_1 \cdot L_2$$**

**(3) There exists a $$\epsilon$$-NFA that recognizes $$L^*$$**

*Proof:* (1) Let $$q_0$$ be a new state that is neither in $$M_1$$ nor in $$M_2$$. Make $$q_0$$ as an initial state, and add $$\epsilon-$$transitions from $$q_0$$ to all the initial states in $$M_1$$ and $$M_2$$. The result $$\epsilon-$$NF 
is denoted by $$M'$$. It is not difficult to see that any word $$w \in L_1 \cup L_2$$ is accepted by $$M'$$. Conversely, if $$w$$ is accepted by $$M'$$, denote its sequence of states in $$M'$$ as $$U_1,...,U_n$$. Note 
that the states in M1 and M2 are disjoint. So each $$U_i, \ i=1,...,n$$ can be divided into two separate subsets $$U_{i, 1}$$ and $$U_{i, 2}$$, belonging to $$M_1$$ and $$M_2$$, respectively. When $$w$$ is read by $$M_1$$, the resulting 
sequence of states is exactly $$U_{1,1},...,U_{n, 1}$$. When it is read by $$M_2$$, the resulting sequence is $$U_{1,2},...,U_{n,2}$$. Since $$w$$ is accepted by $$M'$$, $$U_n$$ contains at least one terminal state. Therefore, 
either $$U_{n, 1}$$ or $$U_{n, 2}$$ contains at least one terminal state. As a result, $$w$$ is accepted by either $$M_1$$ or $$M_2$$ or both. Thus, $$w \in L_1 \cup L_2$$.

(2) Create a new state $$q_0$$. Add a $$\epsilon$$-transition from each terminal state in $$M_1$$ to $$q_0$$. Add a $$\epsilon$$-transition from $q_0$ to each initial state in $$M_2$$. Make terminate states in $$M_1$$ as 
non-terminal. We show the resulting $$\epsilon-$$NFA $$M'$$ recognizes $$L_1 \cdot L_2$$. If $$w \in L_1 \cdot L_2$$, it must be of the form $$uv$$ (both possibly empty) such that $$u \in L1$$ and $$v \in L_2$$. Therefore, 
$$u$$ is accepted by $$M_1$$ and produces a sequence of states $$U_{1,1},...,U_{n, 1}$$. Similarly $$v$$ is accepted by $$M_2$$ and produces $$U_{1,2},...,U_{m, 2}$$. The last step $$U_{n, 1}$$ in $$M_1$$ must contain at 
least one terminal state in $$M_1$$. So when $$w$$ passes through $$M'$$, the result sequence of states is $$U_{1,1},...,U_{n,1} \cup \{ q_0 \} \cup U_{1,2},...,U_{m, 2}$$. Since $$U_{m,2}$$ contains at least one terminal 
state in $$M_1$$, and this state is also a terminal state in $$M'$$, $$w$$ is also accepted by $$M'$$. 

Conversely, if $$w$$ is accepted by $$M'$$, it produces $$U_1,...,U_k$$. The sequence can be divided into subsequences $$U_{1,1},...,U_{n-1, 1}$$, $$U'$$ and $$U_{2,2},...,U_{m, 2}$$. The set of states $$U'$$ must contain 
$$q_0$$. Since only terminal states are connected to $$q_0$$ via $$\epsilon-$$edges, $$U'$$ must contain at least one terminal state in $$M_1$$. Similarly, $$U'$$ must also contain at least one initial state in $$M_2$$. As 
a result, $$w \in L1 \cdot L2$$.

(3) Create a new state $$q_0$$. Add a $$\epsilon$$-edge from each terminal state in $$M$$ to $$q_0$$. And add a $$\epsilon-$$edege from $$q_0$$ to each initial state in $$M$$. The resulting $$\epsilon-$$NFA $$M'$$ recognizes 
$$L^+$$. Since $$L^* = L^+ \cup \{ \epsilon \}$$ and $$\{ \epsilon \}$$ can be easily recognized by a NFA, by (1) we can construct a $$\epsilon-$$NFA that recognizes $$L^*$$. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$

With Lemma 7, we can easily prove Kleene's Theorem. 

**Theorem 8 (Kleene's Theorem): Regular Language $$\Rightarrow$$ $$\epsilon-$$NFA.**

*Proof*: If $$L$$ is regular language, it must be formed by a finite number of the three operations on atomic languages $$\emptyset, \{ \epsilon \}, \{ a \}$$. It is easy to see that these three types of atomic languages 
can be recognized by $$\epsilon-$$NFAs. Therefore, by Lemma 7, $$L$$ can be recognized by a $$\epsilon-$$NFA. $$ \tag*{$\blacksquare$} $$
 
