---
layout: post
title: PAC Learning III - No Free Lunch Theorem
categories: machine learning
published: true
---

The class of all functions is not PAC-learnable. The reason, loosely speaking, is simply that there are far too many functions. So that an adversary can always pick a function that surprises the 
learner. This notion is made precise by the following theorem.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Theorem 16 (No Free Lunch Theorem)**: Consider a domain $$X$$ and a binary label set $$Y=\{ 0, 1\}$$. Consider the class of all functions $$H$$ and an arbitrary learner $$A$$. 
Then for any $$m < |X|/2$$, there exists a distribution $$D$$ over $$Z = X \times Y$$ such that: (1) there exists $$f \in H$$ such that $$L_D(f) = 0$$, and (2) for any random sample $$S_m$$ 
drawn i.i.d. by $$D$$, with probability at least $$\frac{1}{7}$$ the generalization error $$L_D(A(S)) \geq \frac{1}{8}$$ 
</span>

*Proof*: Consider a set $$C \subset X$$ of size $$2m$$, and the class of functions $$H_C$$ which is $$H$$ restricted to $$C$$. Note that $$H_C$$ contains all possible functions 
$$f: C \rightarrow  \{ 0, 1 \}$$. So its size $$T = 2^{2m}$$.  Let $$f_1,...,f_i,...,f_T$$ be the sequence of functions in $$H_C$$.

Now for each $$f_i$$, let the distribution $$D_i$$ over $$C \times \{ 0, 1 \}$$ be such that $$P(x, y) = \frac{1}{|C|}$$ if $$f_i(x)= y$$, and $$P(x, y) = 0$$ otherwise. 
Note that $$L_{D_i}(f_i) = 0$$. 

Next, if we i.i.d. draw $$m$$ sample from $$X$$, then there are totally $$K=2m^m$$ different samples. Denote these samples by $$S_1,...,S_j,..., S_K$$. Furthermore, for a specific distribution
$$D_i$$, let $$S_{j, i}$$ denote the $$j-th$$ sample that drawn by $$D_i$$. (For each distribution $$D_i$$, each $$x$$ can only be labelled by either 0 o 1, but not both.)

After the above set up, we are going to show

$$ \max_i E_{S_{j, i} \sim D_i}\big[L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i}))\big] \geq \frac{1}{4}  \tag{1} $$ 

. If (1) is true, then there exists at least one $$D_i$$ such that $$E_{S_{j, i} \sim D_i}\big[L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i}))\big] \geq \frac{1}{4}$$. This further means there exists a distribution $$D$$ 
over $$X \times Y$$ ($$P(x, y) = 0$$ for $$x \notin C$$) such that there exists $$f_i$$ which makes $$L_D(f_i) = 0$$, and 

$$E_{S_{j} \sim D}\big[L_{D_i}(A(S_{j}))\big] \geq \frac{1}{4}  \tag{2} $$

Applying the inequality $$P[X > 1-a] \geq \frac{E[X] - (1-a)}{a}$$ and let $$a=\frac{7}{8}$$, (2) would imply

$$P[L_D(A(S)) \geq \frac{1}{8}] \geq \frac{1}{7}$$

, which is our desired result. 

To prove (1), we apply the trick "max > average > min" . So

$$\begin{align}
 \max_i E_{S_{j, i} \sim D_i}\big[L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i}))\big] &\geq \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T  E_{S_{j, i} \sim D_i}\big[L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i}))\big] \\
 &= \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T \frac{1}{K} \sum_{j=1}^K L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i})) \\
 &= \frac{1}{K} \sum_{j=1}^K \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i})) \\
 &\geq min_j \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i}))  \tag{3}
\end{align}$$

. The second line above holds because the samples $$S_1,...,S_j,...,S_K$$ are equally likely to be drawn. So the expected value is simply obtained by summing up first and then taking average.

Looking at equaiton (3), we know that in order for (1) to be true, we have to prove for every sample $$S_j$$, 

$$\frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i})) \geq \frac{1}{4} \tag{4}$$

. To this end, let's carefully look at the sample $$S_{j, i}$$. Note that $$S_{j, i}$$ include at most $$m$$ unique instances of $$C$$. So let's $$C' \subset C$$ be the set that contains 
$$x$$ such that $$x \notin S_{j}$$. Clearly $$|C'| = p \geq m $$. Thus

$$\begin{align}
\frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T L_{D_i}(A(S_{j, i})) &= \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T \frac{1}{2m}\sum_{r=1}^{2m} I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)}  , \ \  sum \ up \ each \ instance \ error \\
&\geq \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T \frac{1}{2m} \sum_{x_r \in C'} I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)} , \ \ only \ consider \ instances \ in \ C_r \\
&\geq \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T \frac{1}{2p} \sum_{x_r \in C'} I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)} , \ \ since \ p \geq m \\
&= \frac{1}{2} \frac{1}{p} \sum_{x_r \in C'}  \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)}  \\
&\geq \frac{1}{2} \cdot \min_{x_r \in C'}  \frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)}
\end{align}$$

. Now it remains to show for every $$x_r \in C'$$

$$\frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T  I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)} \geq \frac{1}{2} \tag{5}$$

To see this, we can divide the $$T$$ functions $$f_1,..., f_T$$ into $$\frac{T}{2}$$ pairs, each of which satisfies $$f_{i_1}(x_r) \neq f_{i_2}(x_r)$$ but $$f_{i_1}(x)=f_{i_2}(x)$$ for all other 
$$x \in C$$. Thus, for each pair, either $$A(S_{j, i_1})(x_r) = f_i(x_r)$$ or $$A(S_{j, i_2})(x_r) = f_i(x_r)$$. This results in 

$$\frac{1}{T} \sum_{i=1}^T  I_{A(S_{j, i})(x_r) \neq f_i(x_r)} = \frac{1}{T} \cdot \frac{T}{2} [I_{A(S_{j, i_1})(x_r) = f_i(x_r)} + I_{A(S_{j, i_2})(x_r) = f_i(x_r)}] = \frac{1}{2}$$

. This completes our proof. $$\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

Eqution (5) in the above proof is the key step. Essentially it means: if we can only see a sample half the size of the whole domain, you can't predict the other half.

With No Free Lunch Theorem, it is straightforward to prove 

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Corollary 17:** The class of all functions is not PAC-learnable.
</span>

*Proof*: Assume it is PAC-learnable. Then there exists a desired learner $$A$$. Now take $$\epsilon=\frac{1}{8}$$ and $$\delta=\frac{1}{7}$$. According to No Free Lunch function, no matter how 
large $$m$$ is, there always exists $$C \subset X$$ (here of course we are talking about infinite domains) of size $$2m$$ such that $$A$$ fails on a distribution $$D$$. Therefore, $$A$$ cannot be the 
PAC-learner. $$\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

One may wonder whether any infinite class is not PAC-learnable. Luckily the anwser is negative. The feature that determines PAC-learnability is not a class's absolute size but its "effective size".
This is characterized by a notion called VC-dimension. In the next post, I will introduce the concept of VC-dimension and demonstrate the proof that PAC-learnability implies finite VC demension.