---
layout: post
title: PAC Learning IV - VC Dimension
categories: machine learning
published: true
---

Vapnik–Chervonenkis dimension, named after its discovers Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis, is the ultimate feature that determines PAC-learnability. Its precise notion is as follows.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definiton 18 (Shattering)**: We say that a class of functions $$H$$ shatters a set $$C$$, if the class that is $$H$$ restricted to $$C$$, contains all possible function $$f: C \rightarrow \{ 0, 1\}$$. 
</span>

Suppose $$C$$ is finite and of size $$m$$. If $$H$$ shatters $$C$$, then $$|H_C| = 2^m$$. (The cardinarity of the class of functions mapping from $$X$$ to $$\{ 0, 1\}$$ is $$2^{|X|}$$, no matter $$X$$
is finite or not.)

With the notion of shattering, we can define the VC dimension of a class.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definiton 19 (VC Dimension)**: The VC dimension of a class of functions $$H$$ is the largest $$m$$ such that there is a set $$C$$ of size $$m$$ that can be shattered by $$H$$.
</span>

A class $$H$$ can shatter any set if it has infinite VC dimension. 

Recall in the proof of No Free Lunch theorem, if a set $$C$$ is of size $$2m$$, and a class $$H$$ can shatter $$C$$, then for any learner we can always find a distribution $$D$$ that fails the learner.
The same argument can be used to prove $$(3) \Rightarrow (4)$$ in Theorem 15.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Corollary 20**: PAC-Learnability $$\Rightarrow$$ Finite VC Dimension.
</span>

*Proof*: Assume $$H$$ is PAC-learnable and let $$A$$ be any successful learner. If $$H$$ has infinite dimension, then it can shatter any set $$C$$ of size $$2m$$. By the same arguments in No Free Lunch theorem, there is a distribution 
$$D$$ that fails $$A$$. $$\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

The final piece in the Fundemental Theorem is $$(4) \Rightarrow (1)$$, i.e. Finite VC dimension $$\Rightarrow$$ Uniform Convergence. 

To this end, let's look at an important consequence of finite VC dimension.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definition 21 (Growth Function)**: The growth function of a class $$H$$, denoted by $$\tau_H: N \rightarrow N$$, is defined as 
</span>

$$\tau_H(m) = \max_{C \subseteq X, |C|=m} |H_C|$$

. In other words, $$\tau_H(m)$$ is the max number of functions after $$H$$ is restricted to a set $$C$$ of size $$m$$. 

If a class has finite VC dimension $$d$$, then when $$m \leq d$$, we have $$\tau_H(m) = 2^m$$ since $$H$$ can shatter any set of size $$m$$. When $$m > d$$, clearly $$\tau_H(m) < 2^m$$. 
The reason why finite VC dimension implies PAC-Learnability is that when $$m$$ increases, $$\tau_H(m)$$ only grows at a speed polynomial in $$m$$ rather than exponentially. So the "effective size"
of a class is bounded. As a result, the adversary looses the freedom to select any function that surprises the learner. 

The fact that $$\tau_H(m)$$ grows polynomially is stated as follows. 

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Lemma 22 (Sauer-Shelah Lemma)**: $$\tau_H(m) \leq \sum_{i=1}^d \binom m i$$. When $$m > d$$, $$\tau_H(m) \leq (\frac{em}{d})^d$$.
</span>

*Proof*: When $$m \leq d$$, $$H$$ can shatter any set of size $$m$$. So $$\tau_H(m) = 2^m = \sum_{i=1}^m \binom m i = \sum_{i=1}^d \binom m i$$.

Now consider $$m \geq d + 1$$. We prove by induction on $$m$$. Assume the lemma holds for $$ d \geq m' < m$$. Consider a set $$C$$ of size $$m$$, and the class $$H_C$$. It suffices to show 
$$|H_C| \leq \sum_{i=1}^d \binom m i$$. 

To this end, let's divide $$H_C$$ into two sets $$H_1$$ and $$H_2$$ in the following way. Let $$C' = \{x_1,...,x_{m-1} \}$$ denote any $$m-1$$ members in $$C$$. We say any $$h_1, h_2 \in H_C$$ are twin functions if 
(1) $$h_1(x_i) = h_2(x_i), \ i = 1,...,m-1$$, and (2) $$h_1(x_m) = 0, h_2(x_m) = 1$$. So we assign all such $$h_1$$ to $$H_1$$ and all such $$h_2$$ to $$H_2$$. For the remaining functions that do not have twins, we assign 
them to $$H_1$$. Note that 

$$|H_C| = |H_1| + |H_2|   \tag{1}$$ 

Now let's investigate $$H_1$$ and $$H_2$$.For $$H_1$$, observe that 
$$|H_1| = |H_{1, C'}|$$, where $$H_{1, C'}$$ means the class obtained by restricting $$H_1$$ to $$C'$$. The reason is that all possible their twin functions are assinged to $$H_2$$. Since $$H_{1, C'} \subseteq |H|$$ 
(for $$x \notin C'$$, $$h(x)$$ takes only one value for any $$h \in H_{1, C'}$$), we have $$VC(H_{1, C'}) \leq d $$. Therefore, applying the induction assumption we have 

$$|H_1| = |H_{1, C'}| \leq \sum_{i=1}^d \binom {m-1} i  \tag{2}$$

. On the other hand, for $$H_2$$, again we have  
$$|H_2| = |H_{2, C'}|$$. Unlike $$H_1$$, any $$h_2 \in H_2$$ takes exactly one value on $$x_m$$, i.e. $$h_2(x_m) = 1$$. So if $$T$$ can be shattered by $$H_2$$, then $$T \cup \{ x_m \}$$ can be shattered by $$H$$, since 
for any $$h_2 \in H_2$$ its twin function $$h_1$$ exits in $$H_1$$ and hence in $$H$$ as well. Thus, $$VC(H_2) \leq d - 1$$. Applying the induction assumption we have

$$|H_2| \leq \sum_{i=1}^{d-1} \binom {m-1}{i}  \tag{3}$$

Combining (1)(2)(3) we obtain 

$$\tau_H(m) \leq \sum_{i=1}^{d} \binom {m}{i}$$

. Finally, when $$m \geq d+1$$, we have $$0 < \frac{d}{m} < 1$$ and 

$$(\frac{d}{m})^d \cdot \sum_{i=1}^{d} \binom {m}{i} \leq \sum_{i=1}^{m} (\frac{d}{m})^d \binom {m}{i} = (1+\frac{d}{m})^m \leq e^d$$

. Thus, 
$$\tau_H(m) \leq (\frac{ed}{m})^d  \tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$