---
layout: post
title: PAC Learning II - Finite Class
categories: machine learning
published: true
---

In this post, I will demonstrate the proofs that any finite class is both PAC-learnable and agnostic PAC-learnable. The former is easier with the trick of union bound.
The latter is more difficult and involves the notion of uniform convergence.

## PAC-learnability of Finite Class

Recall that we are talking about a domain $$X$$ and a binary label set $$Y=\{ 0, 1 \}$$. Consider a finite class $$H$$. To prove $$H$$ is PAC-learnable, all we need is to find the 
desired learning algorithm $$A$$. Luckily, ERM is the desired learner. 

To show ERM is our desired learner, we proceed as follows. For a distribution $$D$$ over $$X \times Y$$, if the realizability assumption holds for $$H$$, it means that there exists some 
function $$h^* \in H$$ achieves 0 generalization error, i.e. $$L_D(h^*) = 0$$. Now this function $$h^*$$ would also achieves $$0$$ training error for any sample $$S$$.  
So for any distribution $$D$$, consider a i.i.d. drawn sample $$S$$ of size $$m$$. The ERM algorithm would output a function $$h$$ and it must be the case that $$h$$ achieves $$0$$ training error.
 Otherwise, since we already have $$h^*$$ with $$0$$ training error, if $$h$$ achieves a training error greater $$0$$, ERM would never output $$h$$. 
 
 The output $$h$$ may or may not be $$h^*$$. For a sample $$S$$, there exists a subset of "bad" functions $$H_b(S)$$ such that any $$h' \in H_b(S)$$ would achieve $$0$$ training error on $$S$$. Of course, 
 the optimal function $$h^*$$ is in any $$H_b(S)$$. If ERM can luckily pick $$h^*$$, then we will be very happy. But there is no guarantee that this would happen for any sample $$S$$. When given the sample 
 $$S$$, ERM always outputs a function $$h$$ from the bad class $$H_b(S)$$. We call it bad class because it might contain many functions that achieve large generalization errors.
 
 Now the question is: how can ERM avoid picking a bad function? The answer is straighforward: increasing the training sample size $$m$$. For a bad function to be picked by ERM, it is necessary that 
 all $$m$$ instances fall into its "good" area. Since it is a bad function, the probability measure of its "good" area in $$X$$ is less than $$1-\epsilon$$. The probability that all $$m$$ instances 
 fall into this area is $$<(1-\epsilon)^m \leq e^{-\epsilon m}$$.
 
Let's denote by $$E_h$$ the event that all $$m$$ instances fall into its good area. So $$P[E_h] < e^{-\epsilon m}$$.  Now let's consider the set of all bad functions $$H_b$$. The probability that 
all $$m$$ instances fall completely in at least one of the bad functions is $$P[\bigcup_{h \in H_b} E_h]$$. Since the class $$H$$ is finite, the size of bad functions is at most $$|H|$$. Therefore, 
applying the trick of union bound, we have 

$$P[\bigcup_{h \in H_b} E_h] \leq \sum_{h \in H_b} P[E_h] \leq |H| \cdot e^{-\epsilon m}$$

. So the probability that ERM avoids selecting a bad function, which is also the probability that ERM picks a good function, is 

$$P[ERM \ picks \ a \ good \ function] = 1-P[\bigcup_{h \in H_b} E_h] > 1 - |H| \cdot e^{-\epsilon m}$$ 

. Finally, in order to make this probability great than $$1-\delta$$, we simply solve the inequality

$$\begin{align}
 & 1 - |H| \cdot e^{-\epsilon m} > 1 - \delta \\
 & \Rightarrow |H| \cdot e^{-\epsilon m} < \delta \\
 & \Rightarrow m > \frac{\log (H/\delta)}{\epsilon}
\end{align}$$

. Therefore, as long as the training sample size $$m$$ is greater than $$m_H(\epsilon, \delta) = \frac{\log (H/\delta)}{\epsilon}$$, ERM is guarantee not to return a bad function. 
We also call $$m_H(\epsilon, \delta)$$ the **sample complexity**.

So by the above arguments, we have proved

 <span style="color:dodgerblue">
 Theorem 6: Any finite class is PAC-learnable.
</span> 

## Agnostic PAC-learnability of Finite Class

The arguments of proving PAC-learnability of finite class would not work in the agnostic case. The reason is that in proving PAC-learnability we rely on a key observation: the measure of the good 
area of a bad function is bounded by $$1-\epsilon$$. But in the agnostic case, since we don't know the generalization error of the optimal function, we don't know the error of bad functions either. 
Therefore, we can't bound the probability that $$m$$ instances fall into the good area of a bad function. Furthermore, since the realizability assumption does not hold, the optimial function 
may not even achieve the best training errors. This means even we avoid $$m$$ from completely falling in any bad function, there is no guarantee that the optimal function is selected. 
In short, we need a different argument for proving agnostic PAC-learnability for finite class.

The idea is to investigate the difference between training error and generalization error for any function $$h \in H$$. That is, we look at 

$$|L_S(h) - L_D(h)|$$

. If a sample $$S$$ is good enough such that for any function $$h \in H$$ the gap $$|L_S(h)-L_D(h)|$$ is small, then we should be confident that the selected function $$h$$ can achieve a small 
generalization error $$L_D(h) \leq \inf_{h' \in H} L_D(h') + \epsilon$$. 

Now we need to make precise two notions: (1) what do we by a good sample $$S$$; (2) how large $$m$$ do we need to obtain a good sample with a very high chance ($$ > 1 - \delta $$)?

The answer to the first question refers to a notion called **$$\epsilon-$$representative**. 

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definition 7 ($$\epsilon$$-representative Sample)** We say a sample $$S$$ is $$\epsilon-$$representative with respect to a class of functions $$H$$ if for any $$h \in H$$ we have 
$$|L_S(h) - L_D(h)| < \epsilon $$
</span>

If $$S$$ is a good sample, it can bound the true error of the function returned by ERM. This is made precise by the following lemma.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Lemma 8**: If a sample $$S$$ is $$\frac{\epsilon}{2}-$$representative, then the function $$h$$ returned by ERM based on this sample can achieve generalization error 
$$L_D(h) \leq \inf_{h' \in H} L_D(h') + \epsilon$$
</span>

*Proof:* For any $$h' \in H$$, we have 

$$L_D(h) < L_S(h) + \frac{\epsilon}{2} \leq L_S(h') + \frac{\epsilon}{2} \leq L_D(h') + \frac{\epsilon}{2} + \frac{\epsilon}{2} = L_D(h') + \epsilon \tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

The $$\epsilon-$$representativeness is related to a notion called **uniform convergence**. 

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definition 9 (Uniform Convergence)**: We say a class of functions $$H$$ is uniformly convergent if for any distribution $$D$$, and any $$\epsilon, \delta > 0$$, with sufficiently large 
sample size $$m$$, the i.i.d. drawn sample $$S$$ is $$\epsilon-$$representative with probability at least $$1-\delta$$.
</span>

The sample completely for uniform convergence is denoted by $$m_H^{UC}(\epsilon, \delta)$$. Combing Lemma 8 and Definition 9, we can easily arrive at the following lemma.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Lemma 10**: Uniform Convergence $$\Rightarrow$$ Agnostic PAC-learnability
</span>

*Proof*: Assume $$H$$ is uniformly convergent and let its sample completely be $$m^{UC}_H(\epsilon, \delta)$$. If we take sample size $$m > m_H(\epsilon, \delta) = m_H^{UC}(\frac{\epsilon}{2}, \delta)$$,
then a sample $$S$$ with size $$m$$ is $$\frac{\epsilon}{2}-$$representative with probability at least $$1-\delta$$. By Lemma 8, ERM will return a desired function. That is, $$H$$ is agnostic 
PAC-learnable and ERM is the desired learner. $$\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

For completing the proof that a finite class is agnostic PAC-learnable, we just need to prove it is uniformly convergent, and along the way find out its sample complexity.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Theorem 11**: Any finite class is uniformly convergent. 
</span>

*Proof*: Consider a finite class $$H$$, and a random sample $$S$$ of size $$m$$. The probability that $$S$$ is $$\epsilon-$$representative is

$$\begin{align} 
P[S \ is \ \epsilon-representative] &= 1 - P[S \ is \ not \ \epsilon-representative] \\
&= 1 - P[\bigcup_{h \in H} |L_S(h)-L_D(h)|>\epsilon] \\
& \geq 1 - |H| \cdot P[|L_S(h)-L_D(h)|>\epsilon] \\
\end{align}$$


Note that $$P[L_S(h) - L_D(h)>\epsilon]$$ in the above inequality is a bound applied to all $$h$$, rather than the true probability value. We just write it this way to make the demonstration smooth.

So in order for $$P[S \ is \ \epsilon-representative] > 1 - \delta$$, we simply want
$$|H| \cdot P[|L_S(h)-L_D(h)| > \epsilon ] < \delta $$. To this end, let's investigate further $$L_S(h)$$ and $$L_D(h)$$. 

In fact, $$L_S(h) = \frac{1}{m} \sum_{i=1}^m I_{h(x) \neq y}$$ and $$L_D(h) = E[I_{h(x) \neq y}]$$. Therefore, $$L_D(h)$$ is the expected value of $$L_S(h)$$ (with respect to the random instances 
$$(x_1,y_1),...,(x_m, y_m)$$ in $$S$$). Applying Hoeffding's inequality we have 

$$P[|L_S(h) - L_D(h)| > \epsilon] \leq 2 e^{-2m \epsilon^2}$$

. Substituting it to the previous inequality we have 

$$|H| \cdot 2 e^{-2m \epsilon^2} < \delta \Rightarrow m > \frac{\log (2|H|/\delta)}{2\epsilon^2}\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

Theorem 11 also gives the sample complexity of uniform convergence for the finite class 

$$m_H^{UC}(\epsilon, \delta) = \frac{\log (2 |H| /\delta)}{2\epsilon^2}$$

.

Therefore, combining Theorem 11 and Lemma 10, we conclude that any finite class is agnostic PAC-learnable.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Theorem 12**: A finite class $$H$$ is agnostic PAC-learnable. Its sample complexity is 
</span>

$$ m_H(\epsilon, \delta) = m_H^{UC}(\frac{\epsilon}{2}, \delta) = \frac{2\log (2|H|/\delta)}{\epsilon^2}$$


