---
layout: post
title: Regular Language I - Definition
categories: formal language
published: true
---

In this series, I will introduce **regular language**, including its definitions, properties and my implementation in Go. This post starts with its definitions.

Let $$¥Sigma $$ be an alphabet of finite size. We say a word $$w$$ is a sequence $$a_1...a_n$$ of finite length, where $$a_i ¥in ¥Sigma, ¥ i=1,...,n$$. The sequence of $$0$$ length is also a word, and denoted as $$¥epsilon$$.

A Language $$L$$ is a set of words. For example, let $$¥Sigma = ¥{ a, b, c¥}$$. Then $$L = ¥{ ab, ac, abc ¥}$$ is a language, which contains words $$ab, ac, abc$$. Note that the empty set
$$¥emptyset$$ is also a language. And the set $$¥{  ¥epsilon¥}$$ is also a language, which contains only the empty word. 

We denote by $$¥Sigma^*$$ the language that contains all possible words. 

For any alphabet, the number of languages is infinite. And this infinity is bigger than that of natural number. 

**Theorem 1: For any alphabet $$¥Sigma$$, the set of all languages is uncountable.**

*Proof:* Note that $$¥Sigma^*$$ is a language of infinite size. The set of all languages is the super set of $$¥Sigma^*$$. Therefore, it is uncountable.  $$ ¥tag*{$¥blacksquare$} $$

One can also use the diagonal argument to prove Theorem 1. But it is the same argument in proving the cardinarity of a set is less than that of its super set. 

Out of uncountablely many languages, there is a class of languages, called the class of **regular languages**, that is of our paticular interest. Before giving a definition to regular language, let's define the operations on words and
languages. 

**Definition 2 (operation on words):**

**a. If $$u, v$$ are words, then $$uv$$ is also a word by concatenation**

**b. If $$u$$ is a word, then $$u^n$$ is a word by concatenating $$n$$ instances of $$u$$ for $$n ¥geq 1$$. When $$n = 0$$, $$w^n = ¥epsilon $$**

We use $$¥land, ¥lor$$ to mean "and" and "or", respectively.

**Definition 3 (operation on languages): $$L_1, L_2$$ and $$L$$ are languages. The following are all languages.**

**a. 
$$L_1 ¥cup L_2 = L_1 | L_2 = ¥{ w | w ¥in L_1 ¥lor w ¥in L_2 ¥}$$**

**b.
$$L_1 ¥cap L_2 = ¥{ w | w ¥in L_1 ¥land w ¥in L_2 ¥}$$**

**c.
$$L_1 - L_2 = ¥{ w | w ¥in L_1 ¥land ¥ w ¥notin L_2¥}$$**

**d.
$$¥bar{L} = ¥{ w | w ¥notin L ¥}$$**

**e.
$$L_1 ¥cdot L_2 = L_1 L_2 = ¥{ uv | u ¥in L_1 ¥land ¥ v ¥in L_2 ¥}$$**

**f.
$$L^n = ¥{ w_1...w_n | w_i ¥in L, ¥ i=1,...,n ¥}$$, $$¥ n ¥geq 1$$. When $$n=0$$, $$L^0 = ¥{ ¥epsilon ¥}$$**

**g.
$$L^* = ¥bigcup_{i=0}^{¥infty} L^n $$**

**h.
$$L^+ = ¥bigcup_{i=1}^{¥infty} L^n = L L^*$$**

**g.
$$L? = L ¥cup ¥{ ¥epsilon ¥}$$**

Now we give a definition to regular languages.

**Definition 3 (regular language): A regular language $$L$$ is any language with the following property:**

**a. The empty language $$¥emptyset$$ is a regular language.**

**b. For any $$a ¥in ¥Sigma$$, the singleton language $$¥{ a ¥}$$ is a regular language. Its regular expression is $$a$$**

**c. If $$L_1, L_2$$ are regular languages, then $$L_1L_2$$ is a regular language. Its regular expression is $$ab$$, where $$a ¥in L_1, b ¥in L_2$$.**

**d. If 
$$L_1, L_2$$ are regular languages, then $$L_1 | L_2$$ is a regular language. Its regular expression is $$a|b$$, where $$a¥in L_1, b ¥in L_2$$.**

**e. If $$L$$ is a regular language, then $$L^*$$ is a regular language. Its regular expression is $$a*$$, where $$a in L$$.**

**f. A regular regular language can only be obtained through a-e.**

By Definition 3, if $$L$$ is a regular language, $$L^+$$ and $$L?$$ are also regular languages. 

The class of regular languages can be characterized by finite state machines, which will be our topic of the next post.