---
layout: post
title: PAC Learning I - Framework
categories: machine learning
published: true
---

[Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms](https://www.cse.huji.ac.il/~shais/UnderstandingMachineLearning/index.html) is an excellent textbook for machine learning practioners. 
In the book the authors give a complete introduction to the PAC learning framework, based on which several common machine learning algorithms, such as linear regression, SVM and decition trees, 
are analyzed and compared. In this blog series, I will retell the story of PAC learning, and along the way try to clarify sevral important notions which often cause confusion to new learners.

PAC stands for **Probably Approximately Correct**. The idea behind PAC is simple. Given a random traning sample, if the sample size is large enough, one can learn a **good** classifier 
with **a very high chance**. A "good" classifier is a classifier that is **approximately correct**. Since it is not possible to get all data points in a traning sample, one cannot expect to learn 
a completely correct classifier, but rather an approximately correct one. On the other hand, there is no guarantee that the random traning sample is a "good" sample that covers a area as large as 
possible in the domain of subject matter. But there is a high chance for such a sample. Therefore, one **probably** can learn a good classifier with this sample.

To be specific, let's consider the binary classification problem. There is a domain of subject matter, denoted by $$X$$. Each object in this domain $$x \in X$$ is labelled as either $$0$$ or $$1$$ 
by a labelling function $$f$$. We often use a variable $$y$$ to denote the label. To learn the function $$f$$, we are given a random training sample $$S=\{ (x^{(1)}, y^{(1)}),...,(x^{(m)}, y^{(m)}) \}$$, which is of size $$m$$ and drawn i.i.d. from 
the domain $$X$$ according to a distribution $$D$$. The learning process involves a learning algorithm (also called a learner) $$A$$ and a class of candidate functions $$H$$. The learner $$A$$, upon
receiving the training sample $$S$$, outputs a function $$h \in H$$ that aims at approximating the true labelling function $$f$$. After the above settings, there are two questions of interest:
(1) Can the learner $$A$$ pick a good function $$h$$ from the candidate class $$H$$?; (2) If so, how many instances in the training sample does it need to pick a good function $$h$$?

In fact, these two questions are related to the key notion of learnability in PAC learning framework. If there is a learner $$A$$ that given sufficiently large sample 
can pick a good function $$h$$ from the class $$H$$, we say the class $$H$$ is PAC-learnable. To define precisely PAC-learnability, we need a notion of error evaluation.

In binary classification, a common error evalution of a function $$h$$ is its expected 0-1 loss:

$$L_D(h) = E_{x \sim D}[I_{h(x) \neq y}]$$

, where $$I_{condition}$$ is an indicator variable takes value $$1$$ if the condition holds, and $$0$$ otherwise. The expectation is taken over the whole domain with the distrubion $$D$$.

When the function $$h$$ is evaluated on the whole domain, its error $$L_D(h)$$ is often called **generalization error**. The term "generalization" arises from the fact that $$h$$ is obtained through 
a training process with a training sample, and then generalized onto the whole domain. So in the training process, $$h$$ is evaluted on the training sample 
$$S=\{ (x_1, y_1),...,(x_m, y_m) \}$$, and the associated error is called  **training error**, which is defined as

$$L_S(h) = \frac{1}{m} \sum_{i=1}^m I_{h(x_i)\neq y_i}$$

. The training error is also called **empirical risk**. A natural and common learning algorithm is to minimize training error. In other words, the learning algorithm is searching through the class 
$$H$$, and tries to find a function $$h$$ that minimizes $$L_S(h)$$. This learning algorithm is called **Empirical Risk Minimizer**, abbreviated as **ERM**. With these set up, we are now ready to 
give a definition of PAC learnability. 

First. we give a weak version of defining PAC-learnability. 

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definition 1 (PAC-learnability with respect to a labelling function):** Consider a domain $$X$$, and a labelling function $$f: X \rightarrow \{ 0, 1 \}$$.
 We say that a class of candidate functions $$H$$ is PAC-learnable with respect to $$f$$ if: (a) there is a function $$h^* \in H$$ that achieves $$0$$ generalization error, i.e. $$L_D(h^*)=0$$;
  (b) there exists a learner $$A$$ such that for any distribution $$D$$ over $$X$$, and any $$\epsilon, \delta > 0$$, when given any random traning sample $$S$$ of sufficiently large size $$m$$, 
  with probablity at least $$1-\delta$$ it outputs a function $$h=A(S)$$ whose generlization error $$L_D(h) \leq \epsilon$$.
</span>

Condition (a) in the above definition is called **Realizability Assumption**, meaning that the 0 error can be realized by a function in $$H$$. 
In fact, realizability assumption is not essential in defining PAC. It will be removed later in a more general notion called agnostic PAC-learning. 
Condition (b) is the precise definition of what we means
by ""Probably Approximately Correct"". If a class $$H$$ is PAC-learnable (with respect to the labelling function $$f$$), then of course there must exist a learner that can pick a good function $$h$$
that achieves very small generation error $$\epsilon$$, with a very high chance ($$>1-\delta$$) given sufficiently large sample of size $$m$$ no matter what the distribution $$D$$ is.

To further make precise the notion of PAC-learnability, we remove the constraint of learning with respect to a specific labelling function $$f$$.

<span style="color:dodgerblue">
**Definition 2 (PAC-learnability):** Consider a domain $$X$$, and its binary classification problems. We say a class of candidate functions $$H$$ is PAC-learnable if there exists a learning algorithm
$$A$$ with the following properties: for any labelling function $$f$$, if the realizability assumptions holds, then for any distribution $$D$$ over $$X$$, and any $$\epsilon, \delta > 0$$, when given any random traning sample $$S$$ of sufficiently large size $$m$$, 
  with probablity at least $$1-\delta$$ it outputs a function $$h=A(S)$$ whose generlization error $$L_D(h) \leq \epsilon$$.
</span>

PAC-learnability is a property of a class of candidate functions $$H$$. It entails that there exists a learner $$A$$ that given sufficiently large sample can always pick a good function $$h$$ from $$H$$, regardless of true labelling 
function $$f$$ and the distribution $$D$$. The realizability assumption for $$H$$ is not essential. In fact, if $$H$$ is not realizable for some labelling function $$f$$, a similar notion called 
**agnostic PAC-learnability** can still be applied to $$H$$. In this notion, even thought there is not 0-error function in $$H$$, but there must exists a function $$h^*$$ 
with minimal generalization error. Then we only require the learner $$A$$ to pick a funciton $$h$$ that is not "too far away" from $$h^*$$ in terms of generalization error. That is, 

$$L_D(h) \leq L_D(h^*) + \epsilon$$

. Or if there is no function that achieves minimal error, then 

$$L_D(h) \leq \inf_{h'\in H} L_D(h') + \epsilon$$

.So PAC-learnability is included in agnostic PAC-learnability. If a class is agnostic PAC-learnable, it is necessarily PAC-learnability. 
The reverse is also true. But the proof is not straightforward. 

To make precise the notion of agnostic PAC-learnability, we need to generalize the problem settings first. We have been talking about a domain $$X$$ and a true labelling function $$f$$. An instance 
with label is denoted by a tuple $$(x, y)$$ where $$x \in X$$ and $$y=0 \ or \ 1$$. So an instance $$(x, y)$$ belongs to the Cartesian product $$X \times \{ 0, 1 \}$$. In previous discussion, we talked
about a distribution $$D$$ over $$X$$ and a labelling function $$f$$. In fact, $$D$$ and $$f$$ also defines a joint distribution $$D'$$ on $$X \times \{ 0, 1\}$$. So previously we are merely 
defining PAC-learnability with respect to a class of distributions on $$X \times \{ 0, 1 \}$$, rather than any distribution. Therefore, we can generalize the definition of PAC-learnability with
respect to any distribution, and define therein agnostic PAC-learnability.

 <span style="color:dodgerblue">
 **Definition 3 (PAC-learnability):** Consider a domain $$X$$ and a binary label set $$Y = \{ 0, 1 \}$$. We say a class of candidate functions $$H$$ is PAC-learnable if there exists 
 a learning algorithm $$A$$ with the following property: for any distribution $$D$$ over $$X \times Y$$, if the realizability assumption holds, then for any $$\epsilon, \delta > 0$$, when given any random traning sample $$S$$ of sufficiently large size $$m$$, 
  with probablity at least $$1-\delta$$ it outputs a function $$h=A(S)$$ whose generlization error $$L_D(h) \leq \epsilon$$.
 </span>
 
 By removing the realizability assumption we arrive at the definition of agnostic PAC-learnability.
 
 <span style="color:dodgerblue">
 **Definition 4 (Agnostic PAC-learnability):** Consider a domain $$X$$ and a binary label set $$Y = \{ 0, 1 \}$$. We say a class of candidate functions $$H$$ is agnostic PAC-learnable if there exists 
 a learning algorithm $$A$$ with the following property: for any distribution $$D$$ over $$X \times Y$$, and for any $$\epsilon, \delta > 0$$, when given any random traning sample $$S$$ of sufficiently large size $$m$$, 
  with probablity at least $$1-\delta$$ it outputs a function $$h=A(S)$$ whose generlization error $$L_D(h) \leq \inf_{h'\in H} L_D(h') + \epsilon$$
 </span>
 
Since the realizability assumption does not hold in some distribution, the generalization error of the selected function $$h$$ is only required to be less than $$\epsilon$$ plus the least error (if 
not achievable, then take the infimum).

PAC-learnability is a property of classes of candidate functions. Some class is PAC-learnable and some class is not. For example, any finite class is PAC-learnable. But the class of all functions is
not PAC-learnable. Hunting the features that determine PAC-learnability is a fundemental problem in statistical learning theory. The ultimate answers involve an important notion called 
[**Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vapnik%E2%80%93Chervonenkis_dimension), which is named after its discovers Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis. With this notion,
a fundemental theorem asserting the conditions of PAC-learnability is as follows. 


 <span style="color:dodgerblue">
 **Theorem 5 (Fundermental Theorem in Statistical Learning Theory)**: Consider a class of functions $$H$$. The following statements are equivalent.</span>
 
<span style="color:dodgerblue">
(1) $$H$$ is agnostic PAC-learnable;
</span>

 <span style="color:dodgerblue">
(2) $$H$$ is PAC-learnable;
</span>

 <span style="color:dodgerblue">
(3) $$H$$ has finite VC-dimension 
</span>

I will elaborate on VC-dimension and the proof of Theorem 1 in the future blogs of this series. To warm up, I will first demonstrate the proof of PAC-learnability of any finite class in the next post.
